IAM roles allow you to delegate access to users or services that normally don't have access to your organization's AWS resources. IAM users or AWS services can assume a role to obtain temporary security credentials that can be used to make AWS API calls. Consequently, you don't have to share long-term credentials for access to a resource. Using IAM roles, 
it is possible to access cross-account resources.
IAM role and AD connector are used to give on-premise users attached to a group  access to AWS console.

consolidated billing allows all aws account in an organisation to be billed as one. it helps to reduce cost spent on aws resources.

AWS Config provides a detailed view of the configuration of AWS resources in your AWS account. This includes how the resources are related 
to one another and how they were configured in the past so that you can see how the configurations and relationships change over time.

aws VPN cloudhub is used If you have multiple AWS Site-to-Site VPN connections, you can provide secure communication between sites using the AWS VPN CloudHub.
This enables your remote sites to communicate with each other, and not just with the VPC. it is suitable if you have a multiple branch office.

Using Amazon CloudWatch alarm actions, you can create alarms that automatically stop, terminate, reboot, or recover your EC2 instances

Aurora replicas and CloudFront distribution is used to make the application more resilient to spikes in request rates.


AWS Global Accelerator is a service that improves the availability and performance of your applications with local or global users. 
It provides static IP addresses that act as a fixed entry point to your application endpoints in a single or multiple AWS Regions, 
such as your Application Load Balancers, Network Load Balancers or Amazon EC2 instances. Global Accelerator is a good fit for non-HTTP use cases, 
such as gaming (UDP), IoT (MQTT), or Voice over IP, as well as for HTTP use cases that specifically require static IP addresses or deterministic.

AWS Direct Connect is a networking service that provides an alternative to using the internet to connect to AWS. 
Using AWS Direct Connect, data that would have previously been transported over the internet is delivered through a private network connection between 
your on-premises data center and AWS. you are charged based on data sent outside AWS to other servers.

VPC sharing allows multiple AWS accounts to create their application resources such as EC2 instances, RDS databases, Redshift clusters, and Lambda functions, 
into shared and centrally-managed Amazon Virtual Private Clouds (VPCs). To set this up, the account that owns the VPC (owner) shares one or more subnets
with other accounts (participants) that belong to the same organization from AWS Organizations. After a subnet is shared, the participants can view,
create, modify, and delete their application resources in the subnets shared with them. Participants cannot view, modify, or delete resources
that belong to other participants or the VPC owner.

the difference between fargate and lamda:
AWS Fargate is better suited for running long-lived containerized applications that require more control over resources and infrastructure, 
while AWS Lambda is ideal for event-driven, stateless functions with automatic scaling and minimal management overhead.
The choice between them depends on your specific use case and requirements.


AWS Elastic Beanstalk is an easy-to-use service for deploying and scaling web applications and services developed with Java, .NET, PHP, Node.js,
Python, Ruby, Go, and Docker on familiar servers such as Apache, Nginx, Passenger, and IIS.

instance user data is the data that you specified in the form of a configuration script while launching your instance.
You can use EC2 user data to customize the dynamic installation parts at boot time, rather than installing the application itself at boot time.

Golden AMI is an AMI that you standardize through configuration, consistent security patching, and hardening. It also contains agents you approve for logging, 
security, performance monitoring, etc

STEPS IN CREATING A FIFO:
make sure the name of the FIFO queue ends with the suffix .fifo
delete existing SQS and recreate it as fifo queue
make sure the throughput for the fifo target does niot exceed 3000 messages per seconds. this achieved via batching of 10 queues each with 300 throughputs.

With bucket policies, you can grant users within your AWS Account or other AWS Accounts access to your Amazon S3 resources.

an AWS Gateway Endpoint is a networking feature that allows for secure and private communication between resources in your VPC and specific AWS services,
reducing exposure to the public internet and potentially lowering data transfer costs.
the two services that supports gateway endpoint = AMAZON S3 AND DYNAMODB. The rest of the AWS services use VPC interface endpoints.

IF THE PROBLEM IS PERFORMANCE (NETWORK CONNECTIVITY), USE CLUSTER.
IF THE PROBLEM IS AVAILABILITY, USE PARTITION
IF THE PROBLEM IS FAULT TOLERANCE, USE SPREAD . max of 7 instances per AZ. 

Amazon RDS is a managed service that makes it easy to set up, operate, and scale a relational database in the cloud. It provides cost-efficient 
and resizable capacity while managing time-consuming database administration tasks. can be spinned up in multi AZ.

Amazon Cognito User Pools is used to either provide built-in user management or integrate with external identity providers, such as Facebook, Twitter, 
Google+, and Amazon. A user pool is a user directory in Amazon Cognito.

A permissions boundary can be used to control the maximum permissions employees can grant to the IAM principals (that is, users and roles) that they create and manage.


AWS Cost Explorer helps you visualize, understand, and analyze your AWS costs and usage. It provides a comprehensive set of tools and features to help you monitor and manage your AWS spending.
It also helps you identify under-utilized EC2 instances that may be downsized on an instance by instance basis within the same instance family, 
and also understand the potential impact on your AWS bill by taking into account your Reserved Instances and Savings Plans.

AWS Compute Optimizer recommends optimal AWS Compute resources for your workloads to reduce costs and improve performance by using 
machine learning to analyze historical utilization metrics. Compute Optimizer helps you choose the optimal Amazon EC2 instance types,
including those that are part of an Amazon EC2 Auto Scaling group, based on your utilization data.

FSx for Lustre provides the ability to both process the 'hot data' in a parallel and distributed fashion as well as easily store the 'cold data' on Amazon S3

in EBS volume:
data at rest in encrypted, data moving between ebs and instance is encrypted, snapshot volume are also encrypted.

you cannot set up new aurora db instance and set it up as a read replica for the primary db.

Amazon Kinesis makes it easy to collect, process, and analyze real-time, streaming data so you can get timely insights and react quickly to new information.

Amazon Simple Notification Service (SNS) is a highly available, durable, secure, fully managed pub/sub messaging service that enables you to decouple microservices,
distributed systems, and serverless applications. Amazon SNS provides topics for high-throughput, push-based, many-to-many messaging. SNS is a notification service.

 
MFA and versioning prevents accidental deletion of an object.

By default, the root volume for an AMI backed by Amazon EBS is deleted when the instance terminates. You can change the default behavior to ensure
that the volume persists after the instance terminates. Non-root EBS volumes remain available even after you terminate an instance to which the volumes were attached

A launch configuration is an instance configuration template that an Auto Scaling group uses to launch EC2 instances.
It is not possible to modify a launch configuration once it is created and uses only a single instance type. 

the reason for unhealthy response by ALB for an healthy instance:
the route for the health chcek is misconfigured, the SG of the the instance does not allow traffic from the SG o the LB.

these are the characteristics of ec2 user-data configuration:
-script excuted with user-data uses the root-user privilege
-by default, user-data runs only during the boot-cycle when you first launched an instance.

GuardDuty is for threat detection, Identifies and continously monitors malicious or unauthorized activities in your AWS environment.
Macie is for data security,Helps discover and protect sensitive data (such as PII) within your AWS environment.
Inspector is for vulnerability assessment and best practices. Evaluates the security of your AWS resources and provides recommendations.
These services can be disabled to delete all findings and configurations

Amazon Redshift is a fully managed, petabyte-scale data warehouse service in the cloud

Using Amazon Redshift Spectrum, you can efficiently query and retrieve structured and semistructured data from files in Amazon S3 without 
having to load the data into Amazon Redshift tables.

data sources of amazon guard duty includes: dns log, vpc flow logs, and cloudtrail events

 Amazon DynamoDB is a key-value and document database that delivers single-digit millisecond performance at any scale.

Neptune enables highly interactive graph queries with high throughput to bring social features into your applications. For example,
if you are building a social feed into your application, you can use Neptune to provide results that prioritize showing your users the 
latest updates from their family, from friends whose updates they ‘Like,’ and from friends who live close to them.

AWS CloudTrail is a service that enables governance, compliance, operational auditing, and risk auditing of your AWS account.
With CloudTrail, you can log, continuously monitor, and retain account activity related to actions across your AWS infrastructure.
CloudTrail provides event history of your AWS account activity, including actions taken through the AWS Management Console, AWS SDKs, command-line tools, and other AWS services.

Redis authentication tokens enable Redis to require a token (password) before allowing clients to execute commands, thereby improving data security.

The minimum storage duration is 30 days before you can transition objects from S3 Standard to S3 One Zone-IA.

A transit gateway is a network transit hub that you can use to interconnect your virtual private clouds (VPC) and on-premises networks.

in a NLB, If you specify targets using an instance ID, traffic is routed to instances using the primary private IP address specified in the 
primary network interface for the instance

Job bookmarking is a mechanism that allows AWS Glue to keep track of where a job is left off in case it gets interrupted or fails for any reason

to change the instance type of a running instance, say from t2.micro to t2.large, create a new launch configuration and update the ASG. 

If your identity store is not compatible with SAML 2.0 then you can build a custom identity broker application to perform a similar function. 
this can be done using STS, SAML or custom identity broker.

AWS personal health shows events of your EC2 instance and other resource events logs
AWS service health shows public events that may affect customers in several regions and not related to EC2.

if Amazon SQS doesn't give the required decoupling essence, use FIFO and amazon Simple Work Flow (SWF)
Amazon SWF ensures that a task is never duplicated and its assigned only once. 

RAID 1 is used for data mirroring 
RAID 0 is to improve performance. 

Anywhere you see termination of any kind of instance in an exam, just know that any root volume is terminated or deleted alongside. it only persists if it is attached. 


DynamoDB is integrated with Lambda function. you can trigger a Lambda function with DynamoDB stream. 

Low Queue length increases performance in volume. 
PLS NOTE THIS FORMULAR. 50 × Amount of Volume in Gigabytes = IOPS

The enhanced monitory metrics of cloudwatch agent attached to an RDS DB is OS processes and RDS-Child Processes.

If you got your certificate from a third-party CA, import the certificate into ACM or upload it to the IAM certificate store. 

You can use ACM to generate both public and private SSL/TLS certificate. 


When the protocol is UDP, select a NLB as the LB to use. 
DynamoDB is a key-value DB. 

An Elastic Fabric Adapter (EFA) is a network device that you can attach to your Amazon EC2 instance to accelerate High Performance Computing (HPC) and machine learning applications

Pls note you cannot add dynamodb table to an ASG, only EC2 can be added to ASG
to autoscale a DynamoDB,  use inbuilt capacity of DynamoDB autoscaling. 

AWS License Manager is a service that makes it easier for you to manage your software licenses from software vendors (for example, Microsoft, SAP, Oracle, and IBM) centrally across AWS and your on-premises environments.

EBS Volume types: Magnetic volume is the cheapest, provisioned IOPs is best for High Performance workload..

Amazon  Aurora is the RDS that is ACID compliance. 
Remember ACIDAURORA

• On demand: coming and staying in resort whenever we like, we pay the full price
• Reserved: like planning ahead and if we plan to stay for a long time, we may get a good discount.
• Savings Plans: pay a certain amount per hour for certain period and stay in any room type (e.g., King, Suite, Sea View, ...)
• Spot instances: the hotel allows people to bid for the empty rooms and the highest bidder keeps the rooms.You can get kicked out at any time
• Dedicated Hosts: We book an entire building of the resort
• Capacity Reservations: you book a room for a period with full price even you don’t stay in it

RUN command is used to manage and configure ec2 instance without using rdp or ssh.

Anycast, also known as IP Anycast or Anycast routing, is an IP network addressing scheme that allows multiple servers to share the same IP address, allowing for multiple physical destination servers to be logically identified by a single IP address.

Yes, an EBS volume can be used while a snapshot is being taken. Snapshots are taken as point-in-time copies of the volume and do not impact the volume's normal operation.

If HSM key is zeroized, it cannot be retrieved. zeroized means permanently delete. 

Amazon EKS supports two autoscaling products:
- Karpenter
- Cluster Autoscaler

use Amazon Workspace to create the needed virtual desktops in your VPC.

ENA = enhances OS Bypass functionality in windows
EFA = enhances Os Bypass functionality in linux

You cannot use MFA to connect to a database. use IAM DB authentication 

Kinesis Data Stream only stores data for 24hours by default. you can request a higher storage time up to 1year. 

Asymmetric and symmetric encryption are two primary techniques used to secure data. Symmetric encryption uses the same key for both encryption and decryption,
while asymmetric encryption uses a pair of keys: a public key for encryption and a private key for decryption.

S3 object lock in compliance mode with a retention period prevents even the root use from deleting an object from S3 bucket. 

target scaling policy can increase or decrease capacity based on based on target value. 
it prevents you from over-provisioning an instance . This is a step scaling policy because it triggers capacity without waiting for the cooldown period   
simple scaling policy waits for the cooldown period before it triggers another capacity. 
schedule scaling. when the target group is known for a certain predictive pattern within a specific time frame. 
predictive scaling, when time frame is unknown but scaling pattern is known. 
suspended and resume scaling, to temporarily pause a scaling activities.

use Canary stage option when deploying a new version of applications using API Gateway. 
it's cost effective and cheaper than blue-green method. 

in compliance mode, objects cannot be deleted by any user or even the root user. 
in governance mode, permissions can be given to the user to delete an object. 
legal hold vs retention period. legal hold can be removed by any users, retention period cannot be removed by a user. 

Microsoft Ad Identity Federation is focused on integrating Microsoft Active Directory (AD) with other identity systems, while Web Identity Federation is a broader concept that involves integrating web-based identity providers (e.g., social logins) with various web applications.

AWS Artefact is used to provide access to AWS security and compliance report. 

use Lambda to handle traffic bursting in seconds. 

You cannot disable versioning when object lock is enabled. 

NoSQL is schema flexible than SQL. DynamoDB is good for application that required flexible changes in schema than RDS DB.

lambda@edge function vs cloudfront function. 
lambda@edge = for applications written in node.js and python language
cloudfront = for application written in javascript.

RDS proxy is used to enhance connectivity between Lambda and RDS. it ensures that RDS is not loaded with requests from lambda.
lambda connects to rds proxy and rds proxy connects to your RDS.

                                          rds proxy
client ====> api gateway ====== > lambda =========> database. 

Api Gateway is a serverless gateway from AWS which allows us to create a rest API that can be made public and accessible for clients. support for websocket protocol
client ======> api gateway ======> kinesis data stream ========> kinesis data firehose ===========> S3 
it prevents clients from having a direct access to your application database.

step function is used to have a visual workflow of your lambda function.

REKOGNITION = face labelling, celebrity recognition and face detection
TRANSCRIBE = transcribe voice to text. example; subtitle
POLLY = text to audio
TRANSLATE = translation
LEX = build conversation bot; chatbot
CONNECT = cloud contact center
COMPREHEND = natural language processing (NLP)
SAGEMAKER = ML for every developers and data scientists
FORECAST = build highly accurate forecast
KENDRA = ML powered search engine
PERSONALIZED = real-time personalized recommendations
TEXTRACT = detect text and data in documents

CNAME - routes traffic from one domain to another domain. 
Alias - routes traffic from a domain to AWS resources.

Standby instances are temporarily removed the the ASG and TG of the load balancer.

AWS Direct Connect: Dedicated connection between AWS and On-premise. set up can take almost a month.
AWS site-to-site VPN: to establish connectivity between AWS and on-premise server. Good for organisation with various branches and takes minimum time to set up.

when you apply retention period to an object version explicitly,  specify retention until date for the object version
different version of a single object have different retention modes and periods. 

API Gateway, SQS and KDS are the best services that can handle throttling or buffering during traffic spike

Cognito User Pools handle user authentication and user directory management, while Cognito Identity Pools provide temporary AWS credentials for authorized users to access AWS resources. 

single-tenant Hardware = Dedicated instances 

To notify the security team 30days before certificate expiration,  Leverage AWS Config managed rule to check if any third-party SSL/TLS certificates imported into ACM are marked for expiration within 30 days.
Configure the rule to trigger an SNS notification to the security team if any certificate expires within 30 days

you cannot encrypt AWS RDS replica of the master is not encrypted. The best way to encrypt is to take a snapshot , encrypt the snapshot and delete the master DB, promote the encrypted snapshot as the primary DB. 

Use Global Accelerator to route traffic to a blue/green environment. 

multi-master DB cluster improves write operation efficiency in your db. 

Kinesis Agent cannot write to a Kinesis Firehose for which the delivery stream source is already

DNS hostnames and DNS resolution are required settings for private hosted zones

FXs Luster for Windows file share and File gateway configuration for storage gateway supports SMB protocol

Encrypted AMI results in Encrypted snapshot
you can share AMI accross accounts 
you can share AMI accross regions 

Amazon Kinesis Data Streams is recommended when you need the ability for multiple applications to consume the same stream concurrently

spot block are designed not to be interrupted 
when you cancel an Active spot request, it does not terminate the instance. 
If a spot request is persistent, then it is opened again after your Spot Instance is interrupted

Internet gateway provides Network Access Translation to the instances to which it is attached. 

Use dynamodb point in tine recovery to correct the error when an application writes corrupted data to dynamo db 

You can create an alias record at the top node of a DNS namespace, also known as the zone apex, however, 
you cannot create a CNAME record for the top node of the DNS namespace. So, if you register the DNS name. e.g routing traffic to www.example.com

Autoscaling COOLING PERIOD: 
default time is 300secs
It ensures that the Auto Scaling group does not launch or terminate additional EC2 instances before the previous scaling activity takes effect.

EBS has live configuration and can volumes can be altered without affecting the application persistency   
EBS volume is off instance storage and can persist independently from the life of an instance. 


In Amazon SQS, you can configure the message retention period to a value from 1 minute to 14 days. The default is 4 days
Max message for SQS = 120,000 messages
Max message for FIFO = 20,000 messages

Amazon EKS is cloud agnostic and open-source 

Pls note a wildcard (*) certificate can only handle multiple sub-domains but not different domains.

In cases where your EC2 instance cannot be accessed from the Internet (or vice versa), you usually have to check two things:
- Does it have an EIP or public IP address?
- Is the route table properly configured?

Active-Active failover is used when you want all your resources to he active at all times. use weighted routing policy to achieve this. 
Active-Passive is used when you want most resources to be available. the primary resources is active and the secondary is in standby or passive mode and failover happens when the primary resources goes down. you can use failover routing policy to achieve this. 

provisioned and expedited retrieval helps you to retrieve you data faster from S3. 

only 20 EC2 instances can be provisioned per region. to increase this, contact AWS to increase limit. 

For Amazon Aurora. reader endpoint improves read capability
cluster endpoint,  improves write capability.

system manager parameter is used for storing application parameters. like password, AMI ID and instance ID. 

ELB is designed to only run in one region and not across multiple regions.


Dynamodb Streams has the capacity of invoking a Lambda function when Lambda is connected to Dynamodb without seeting up SNS or cloudwatch events. 

A global secondary index can only be created in the region where its parent table resides. It is not a good option for multi region failover. 

AWS AppSync is a serverless GraphQL and Pub/Sub API service that simplifies building modern web and mobile applications

To log API calls on resources, cloudtrail is the best option

Dead Letter Queues are a valuable tool for ensuring message reliability and system resilience in messaging systems. They help prevent message loss and enable developers and administrators to diagnose and address issues in the message flow, improving the overall reliability of the messaging infrastructure.

by default, cross-zone load balancing is not enabled for NLB but enabled for ALB. 

http://bucketname.s3website.region.amazonaws.com OR bucketname.s3website-region.amazonaws.com
the above is the S3 website endpoints format. 

amazon SQS QUEUE is an even notification destination for amazon S3. 
FIFO is not a destination. event can be sent to FIFO using Lambda invokation

SSD- workloads involving frequent read-write
HDD - involving large streaming.
Provisioned IOPS- supports critical business application 

You can't directly copy data from Snowball Edge devices into AWS Glacier. You must use an S3 lifecycle policy. 

A site-to-site VPN connects two or more networks over the internet, providing secure communication. supports encryption in transit
A direct connection involves physically linking two networks without the internet, offering faster and more secure data transfer. no encryption in transit
